I will just mention again something I brought up last week.
We have started this new series called Long Journey Home and we're looking at the trek of the children of Israel from Egypt to the Promised Land.
And I suggested to you that as we go through this, that maybe you want to keep your own travel log.
Now what I mean by that is I would encourage you to be reading the story on your own at home.
And as you're reading it, be praying about it because I think one of the things we learn from the voyage of the children of Israel, that trek,
is how much of their journey parallels the journey that we make as followers of Jesus.
And so as you read that, be perfectly thinking about what is there here that I can learn that will be helpful in my own journey as a Christian.
And as you think about that as Lord brings things to mind, I would like you to keep a journal.
And just write down, what are those observations?
Now, I understand that for many of our women, this journal may have a lot of pages, including flowers and highlights and things like that.
And many of our men, it's going to say yes, no, yes, no.
That's okay.
Whatever journaling means for you, just go ahead and do that.
But track with what you're learning as you're reading about the children of Israel and their journey.
A couple of weekends ago, Burnett and I had a chance to be in Oregon because two of our sons live there, all the grandkids live there.
And so we try to get down a few times a year.
And if you ever paid attention as you're driving through Oregon, there are places you'll come across these historical markers along the road.
And the signs will point out for you the route that you're traveling on was part of the original Oregon Trail.
that hazardous trail of 2,000 miles that once was traversed by these hearty pioneers that were looking to make a new life in the West.
Most young adults who were in school in the 1990s are probably familiar with this game, right?
Oregon Trail.
And in order to win this game, this simulation, you had to overcome numerous obstacles that settlers might have encountered as they're on the trail.
And if you failed,
to pass the tests, you died.
That was very sad.
And so I know all of my kids would come home going through cyber grief because their family had just died in the Oregon Trail.
For the actual pioneers though, that danger was very real.
In fact, here is how one history site describes it.
The trail was so deadly, it's been called the nation's longest graveyard.
Some historians estimate that if you calculated the total number of people who died on the trail from 1840 to 1860, and then evenly spaced out all of the graves from Independence to Oregon City, you could place a grave every 50 yards over the entire 2000 mile trip.
It's pretty staggering to think about.
While disease accounted for a lot of those deaths, river crossings were also
deadly serious endeavors.
We don't think much about it because we get to big rivers and we just drive across bridges or we take ferries.
And we don't realize experientially what a huge obstacle those rivers were for the people as they traveled west.
But here is a little reenactment film I found from the 1950s.
Crossing rivers and there were many between Missouri and Oregon was a tedious and sometimes dangerous undertaking.
It took hours for the wagon train to cross a simple shallow forward, but crossing a deep fast running river could mean an eternity of unloading, caulking wagons, removing their wheels and floating them across the treacherous currents, then reloading them on the other side before moving off.
The Lord of hosts will do battle for us.
Behold his mighty hand.
Kind of makes you appreciate how far computer graphics have come doesn't it?
Well, today we're gonna talk about that story, the crossing of the Red Sea, and so I'll begin by just reading with you what actually happened.
This comes from Exodus chapter 13 and 14, and so begins at verse 17.
When Pharaoh finally let the people go, God did not lead them along the main road that runs through Philistine territory, even though that was the shortest route to the Promised Land.
God said, if the people are faced with a battle,
They might change their minds and return to Egypt.
So God led them in a roundabout way through the wilderness toward the Red Sea, jumping down to Exodus 14.
Then the Lord gave these instructions to Moses.
Order the Israelites to turn back and camp by Pai Harahat.
I can't say that.
Hararoth, there you go, between McDoll and the sea.
Camp there along the shore, cross from Baal Zephan.
Then Pharaoh will think
The Israelites are confused.
They're trapped in the wilderness.
And once again, I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and he will chase after you.
I have planned this in order to display my glory through Pharaoh and his whole army.
After this, the Egyptians will know that I am the Lord.
When word reached the king of Egypt that the Israelites had fled, Pharaoh and his officials changed their minds.
What have we done?
Letting all those Israelite slaves get away, they asked.
So Pharaoh harnesses chariot and called up his troops.
As Pharaoh approached, the people of Israel looked up and panicked when they saw the Egyptians overtaking them.
They cried out to the Lord and they said to Moses, why did you bring us out here to die in the wilderness?
Weren't there enough graves for us in Egypt?
What have you done to us?
Why did you make us leave Egypt?
Didn't we tell you this would happen while we were still in Egypt?
We said, leave us alone.
Let us be slaves to the Egyptians.
It's better to be a slave in Egypt than a corpse in the wilderness.
But Moses told the people, don't be afraid.
Just stand still and watch the Lord rescue you today.
The Egyptians you see today will never be seen again.
The Lord himself will fight for you.
Just stay calm.
Then the Lord said to Moses, why are you crying out to me?
Tell the people to get moving, pick up your staff, raise your hand over the sea.
Divide the water so the Israelites can walk through the middle of the sea on dry ground and I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians and they will charge in after the Israelites.
Then Moses raised his hand over the sea and the Lord opened up a path through the water with a strong east wind.
The wind blew all that night turning the sea bed into dry land so the people of Israel walk through the middle of the sea on dry ground
with walls of water on each side.
Then the Egyptians, all of Pharaoh's horses, chariots, and cherry tears, chased them into the middle of the sea.
Then the waters returned and covered all the chariots and charioteers, the entire army of Pharaoh, of all the Egyptians who had chased the Israelites into the sea, not a single one survived.
The first thing I'd want to draw our attention to this morning is we think about this story and probably a story that you have heard numerous times before.
If you went to Sunday school, I'm sure you had it in Sunday school.
But one of the things I want to draw your attention to is this roundabout path that God took the people on.
Did you notice that, right?
The outset?
We're told that the Lord chose to send Israel the long way toward their promised new homeland.
And the reason
was so that they would avoid meeting strong opposition.
These people, if you think about it, they had spent generations as powerless slaves.
These were not battle-hardened warriors.
They didn't have any civilian militia that had been training for combat all these years.
They were just slaves.
They knew how to make bricks, but they did not know how to fight wars.
I've been reading through a biography of John Adams recently.
He was the second president of the United States, a key figure in the founding of our nation.
And in that biography, it relates the Battle of Kips Bay.
One of the first battles that happened when the revolution was beginning and the British decided to attack with this shock and awe campaign.
British General Howe landed 9,000 of his highly trained British troops.
He also unleashed this massive naval bombardment against the town.
The American troops, of course, were comprised of just local militias.
These were made up of farmers and shopkeepers and craftsmen who wanted to gain their freedom.
They were highly motivated, but they never actually faced a real battle.
And suddenly they are faced with real cannon fire breaking into their defenses, real bullets whipping over their heads.
And as the story goes, the Americans almost immediately broke rank and began running.
General Washington was furious.
The record is that he was riding his horse back and forth.
He had his whip out.
He was trying to drive them in back to the line so they'd stop running away from the battle.
even fired his pistol in the air, pulled his sword out at one point.
But then finally realizing that he had completely lost control of his troops, he had to turn tail on his horse and simply follow his men as they retreated from the battle.
That's the same kind of situation I think we have here with the Israelites.
They are gonna be faced with battles, but the Lord knows at this point they have never had to face battle before.
And so he takes them on this roundabout way.
You know, I think sometimes that is true of our walk with God.
I don't know what your experience was when you first became a follower of Jesus.
Maybe even more so, this would be true if for you it was as a young adult or an older adult that you came to Christ.
But I've had lots of friends that have related how when they first came to Jesus, it just seemed like, man, life was just incredible.
You know, problems just went away.
answers to prayer, miraculous answers to prayer, time and time again.
And it was just so exciting.
But then a day came when it seemed like the trials got harder.
And rather than getting to skirt around them, it seemed that God let them know that it was time to face the trial and to fight.
If that's been your experience, I just want to say that that's not because
God has forsaken you.
There is growth.
There is deepening of faith that happens in the midst of trial.
There are lots of verses that talk about the fact that how going through trial increases perseverance and perseverance builds character.
Character brings forth godly fruit in our lives.
But I think there are times when God knows you're not ready for the fight
And he takes us on the roundabout way, but then there comes a point where he says, okay, we're going to do some character building in your life right now.
Sometimes God will lead you around the struggle.
Sometimes he will lead you through it.
And now in the weeks ahead, we're going to see some of the lessons that God had for Israel and for us when it was time to fight.
But at this early point in the journey, God leads them around the fight.
The days are going to come soon enough when they're going to be called to step up.
God would still be their deliverer.
We're going to see that time and again.
God is still their deliverer, but it is going to be a deliverance in the fight, not from the fight.
Second thing I would draw our attention to is the place where God told them to set up camp.
by that place that I can't pronounce between McDoll and the sea.
Strategically, it wasn't a good location.
In fact, in Pharaoh's eyes, it certainly looked like opportunity knocking.
We learned that no sooner had Pharaoh let the people go,
under duress, right, those ten horrible plagues, especially that final one, the death of the firstborn, that Pharaoh finally caved.
He felt he had no choice but to let the people go.
But then, as all those slaves have now escaped, he looks around and thinks, my goodness, what have we done?
We just released our whole workforce here.
And he has this change of heart and decides we need to go get those people back.
And when he sees where they are camping, he thinks this isn't going to be too difficult.
I think it's pretty safe to assume that Pharaoh had some scouts that were keeping tabs on this mass migration of slaves as they were leaving.
And according to their reports, it would appear that these stupid slaves had got themselves lost.
No sooner had they got out there than they got themselves lost.
And yet the Lord has told Moses that
This is all part of his plan.
In fact, they weren't where they were because they were lost.
They were where they were because God put them there.
He had led them to that location.
So while Pharaoh assumes that his dumb slaves don't know where they're going, God says, no, I have a surprise in store.
Now I'm guessing that Moses, looking around at where they're camping, he had to be saying to himself, you know, Lord, is this really a good idea?
because it feels like we don't have a lot of options.
I've got people here that you and I both agree they don't know how to fight and we've got an army coming from that direction and we've got nothing but water behind us.
And yet the Lord says you're exactly where I want you right now.
So as anticipated Pharaoh decides he's going to try to recapture those slaves, thinks it's going to be easy.
We find out that it's not just Pharaoh who thinks that they're lost.
The children of Israel themselves recognize they're in a bad spot.
They can see the dust.
They can see horses and chariots coming toward them.
They realize too late that they are trapped and they know something about Pharaoh's cruelty when he's angered.
They have lived his slaves for generations and they know how their masters are when they are angry.
So desperate, frightened,
They turn on Moses, which is a bad habit.
We're gonna see repeated on this journey over and over again.
And here's what happens.
They cried out to the Lord and they said to Moses, why did you bring us out here to die in the wilderness?
Weren't there enough graves for us in Egypt?
You know, I think it's easy for us living on this side of history to smirk just a little bit at their responses.
that they weren't more noble, that they weren't more faith-filled.
I mean, they'd been through all those plagues.
They had seen how God had brought them out of a place that they thought they could never escape.
And here they are, the first sign of trouble, and they're turning on Moses and saying, you know, we could have died just as well back there as out here.
What have you done to us?
But you know, I think we also understand that when trials come, there is this very human tendency
to look around for someone to blame.
Who can I pin this on?
We can even be tempted to want to return back to a bad situation because it seems less scary to face the bad that we know rather than moving into the potential dangers of the unknown.
And that was true of these people.
They looked around and they said, you know, I think maybe life was better as a slave.
Could we just wind the clock back and go back to that status?
You know, the thing is we like to stay in control.
Or maybe I'm the only one.
I bet you all like to stay in control.
We like to know how things are going to play out.
But I've also learned in my own life, and I've watched lots of other people, that our control is often deceptive.
Some of the goals that we set our hopes on to find fulfillment so often turn out to be mirages.
The thing that we thought was going to make life worth living, we get there and life still seems to have empty places.
The sacrifices that we're willing to make to get the things that we want so often end up sacrificing too much.
Sometimes the modes that we have used to cope when life got hard
Change from being just a coping mechanism into being a new kind of master, a new kind of addiction that enslaves us and won't let us go.
God in His mercy may take us to a place, a point of crisis, where we suddenly realize that things are beyond our control, a place where we run out of options.
We're the things that we thought were gonna make us free in our own plan.
We suddenly face the reality that I'm not free.
It didn't do what it promised.
And if we're fortunate, we reach a place where we recognize that if God doesn't save us, nothing else will.
And in those moments, we can either cry out to him.
We can lean in and say, Lord, I need you.
Or we can turn back to the things that enslave us.
And I bet you've seen it happen in people's lives.
They get right to that crisis point and you think they're about to have that breakthrough.
And suddenly they just turn around and say, you know what?
At least I know who the master was over here.
I was looking at some of the material from Celebrate Recovery.
We have a Celebrate Recovery group that meets here.
It's modeled after AA, the 12 Steps.
And I noted what step number one is for them.
People with hurts and hang ups and habits that have taken control.
Step number one, we admitted that we were powerless over our addictions and compulsive behaviors that our lives had become unmanageable.
Step one in a person's life in breaking free from slavery is recognizing that I can't control the slave master.
I'm going to need someone bigger than me if I'm ever going to find freedom.
Now the solution, the salvation, the deliverance for Israel was something that they could not imagine being possible.
If you had given them a fill in the blank as to God will deliver us by blank, none of them would have got this answer.
God opens up a path through the sea
and let them pass through on dry land.
And then the sea closes up and the power that had enslaved them was cut off, never more to be their master.
That chase was over.
That didn't mean there weren't still battles to be fought, but there had been a definitive crossing over from a land of slavery to a journey now as free people
to a land of promise.
I was working on this passage, and I came across, I thought it was a beautiful quote that was recounted by the late Timothy Keller.
He recounts being a young student, and he heard a talk by British theologian Alec Motier.
And here's part of what Dr. Motier said.
Think of what an Israelite would say on the way to Canaan after passing through the Red Sea.
If you asked an Israelite,
Who are you?
He might reply, I was in a foreign land under the sentence of death and in bondage.
But I took shelter under the blood of the lamb, and our mediator let us out, and we crossed over.
Now we're on our way to the promised land, though we're not there yet.
That's exactly what a Christian says, almost word for word.
I love how he makes that parallel for us.
The deliverance of Israel from their slavery in Egypt is captured in two powerful images.
Last week we considered Passover, that deliverance from death by the people placing faith in the seemingly powerless blood of a lamb.
And now we have this image, their deliverance from enslavement by a miraculous crossing that left
the land of slavery behind.
In both cases, the people had to take a step of faith.
They couldn't defeat the destroyer on the night of Passover.
In fact, they were told just to stay in your home.
Don't even go outside.
You can't face this on your own.
And the only protection between them and death was their willingness to do what God had told them
to apply the blood of the Lamb to their doorposts.
Well, now here they are, trapped between Pharaoh's chariots and the sea, and it's evident once again that their own strength is not going to deliver them.
They can't escape nor can they defeat their masters.
And their only hope was to step in faith through the channel that God had created, and in doing so, cross over
into a land of freedom.
Do you know what sets Christianity apart from every other world religion?
We might sum it up as, how do you cross over?
In every other religious system, the way you cross over is the same way Oregon pioneers tackled rivers.
You swim hard.
You do all that you can to keep your head above water, you fight the current, and if you do it well enough, you hope you'll be lucky enough to crawl up the bank on the far side.
Christianity says that plan will never work.
Here's what the Apostle Paul wrote, Romans 323, this from the new living translation.
He says, everyone has sinned.
We all fall short,
of God's glorious standard.
I think that idea of falling short isn't popular in a culture that is obsessed with developing positive self-esteem.
I don't want anyone telling me that I'm gonna come up short.
And it can be an especially hard thing for modern people to think of themselves as sinners.
It seems like kind of a harsh word to be using about ourselves.
But let's try a little thought experiment.
For just a minute in your mind, I want you to think of the lowest slime ball of an individual that you have ever known or heard of.
Just get that picture, get that name in your mind.
Who is that horrible person?
And let's figure out where we're going to put them here on Morality River.
There they are over there in Wickedville, just a bad, bad person.
All right, now, I want you to think for a minute about the most virtuous person you've ever known, ever heard of.
I mean, in your mind, this person defines a saint.
And let's put them over here on the other bank of Morality River.
They live near a perfect town.
Now, because of their incredible discipline,
They're stamina, they have made it to the far shore.
In your mind, these are people who have made it.
What I want you to do now is I want you to decide where you would put yourself in the river.
Where would you be?
Now, my guess is that's probably going to be somewhere farther across than that nasty guy.
I mean, he's a bad person and it's not hard for you to go, well, I'm better than him.
Now, unless you are a delusional narcissist, you're probably going to put yourself at least a few strokes behind misperfect.
But you know, I can guarantee you that if you could get access to misperfect personal journal, where all of her innermost thoughts
and the history of her whole life, everything that she's ever done or said or thought.
If you could lay your hands on that and you page through it all the way and you made a list, you would discover that she too hasn't quite hit the other shore.
And you know what you have discovered in the process of this little thought experiment?
You would agree with the Apostle Paul.
Everyone falls short.
None of us on our own can get across that river.
Some of us get farther across than others.
Some of us are pretty strong swimmers.
We look good.
We just don't get to the other side.
Here's what makes Christianity unique.
Not that it points out the truth about our shortcomings.
Some of the people get stuck there.
Go on man, the Bible is just all about how people sin.
Well, it's good to know where you're at.
Let's not deceive ourselves.
But that's not the most important thing.
The most important thing is that it says that God has opened a path across for us.
He hasn't left us drowning in the river or stuck over there in Wickedville.
He has opened a way across.
And it's a path that doesn't depend on our efforts, but on his grace.
Here's what it says in John chapter five.
Whoever hears my word and believes him who sent me has eternal life.
He does not come into judgment, but has passed from death to life.
That's Jesus' words, or this Ephesians chapter two.
God saved you by His grace when you believed.
He took a step of faith.
And you can't take credit for this.
It is a gift from God.
Salvation is not a reward for the good things we've done, so none of us can boast about it.
None of the Israelites could get to the opposite bank
They're at the Red Sea and say, man, are we good river crossers or what?
Did you see the way I came through there?
All they could do was look back and say, what a gift.
What an amazing gift that when we were out of options, when there was nowhere to go, when we didn't have the strength to get ourselves across, God did something for us that we could not do for ourselves.
I thought it might be good as we're thinking about this, just to listen to one testimony.
of what it's like to cross over.
Last week I sat down with Steve Lopes.
We had a great conversation.
Here's just a little snippet of that.
We lived in Port Townsend.
I was trying to run a blacksmithing business, which, who in their right mind wants to do, thinks they could make a living doing that.
I was kind of scared because of all the responsibilities, mortgage, kids, this and that, running a business
I was probably drinking too much.
There were Fridays where my wife would have to call me at the tavern and say, your dinner's in the oven, I'm going to bed.
You know, Satan had a hole in me.
There's no doubt in my mind.
And my wife would say, what is wrong with you?
Why are you doing this?
And I go, I don't know.
I'm a knucklehead.
Anyway, one night I had this dream that I wrecked a bunch of cars.
I ran somebody over trying to get home and there was a policeman in this dream who looked a lot like Jesus.
And he said, you're in big trouble.
You know, it did not leave me that dream.
And it made me start thinking, what are you doing?
I mean, you're talking about Pharaoh's army.
I mean, I'm seeing Pharaoh's army come.
And it's not looking good.
Then once Sunday, this Christian midwife, Carol Gouchy, she said, why don't you come play music with us?
And I like, look, I don't know your music.
I don't know anything about
I'm not a Christian.
I'm actually, now I have a sober look at myself.
I'm actually not a very nice person.
And for some reason, I just grabbed my manal in and came along and God came into my life that moment.
I took a step with him and he was there.
I stopped being fearful.
I started seeing things like the blessings I had rather than the
balls that I was juggling, trying to keep juggled in the air.
I stepped into life from death.
I stepped out of fear into, you know, it says, come under me.
You were burdened and heavy laden and I will give you rest.
I stepped into his rest.
We are early in the journey here, but the journey begins with that crossing over.
And so I just have to ask you this morning, which side of the river are you standing on?
Maybe you're here, you're sitting in a church service, you are surrounded, you assume, by people of faith, but you know in your heart that you are still standing on the Egypt side of the river.
You have not crossed over.
And maybe slavery is a good description of how you feel.
Like Steve, maybe he wouldn't say it out loud to other people, but inside he could feel that I don't know why I'm doing the things that I'm doing.
I don't know why I'm stuck where I'm stuck.
Maybe you relate to that sense of you're in trouble.
I just want to say the same God who opened the Red Sea to provide escape is ready and willing
to open a wave of escape for you as well.
No matter what the past is, no matter what the things are that haunt you or make you feel unworthy, God did not bring the people through the river because they were also noble.
In fact, you saw them standing on the banks going, we should have just died back in Egypt.
It's not because they were that commendable, but it's because he loved them.
And the step begins with simply surrendering to him.
Saying, Lord, I need you?
And I'm willing to let you become the leader.
I'm willing to let you take me where I need to go because I can't do it on my own.
Now, maybe you would say, Tim, I'm working hard on this.
I really am.
I'm working hard to be a good Christian.
I'm trying to do all the right things.
And yeah, there have been some failures on my past, but I'm working.
I'm doing my best to make up for them.
I'm kind of paying God back because I know I owe him big time.
And if we're talking about crossing the river, I am swimming the best that I can.
And I'm just hoping that someday it's good enough.
I'd just say if you think that being a Christian is something that you have to work to become, then you don't understand what Jesus has done for you.
We don't make ourselves Christians.
We accept the gift Jesus has offered.
If you've done that, if you've accepted that gift, then you have crossed over.
There's still a journey ahead, okay?
You're not done, but you're on the other side of the river.
And it's a gift that is offered to us.
And that's why Jesus could tell his followers that he could offer them peace and rest
and life because they were following him, not that it was always easy and yet there was peace even in the difficulty.
Now I'm gonna guess that on a Sunday morning like this, probably a lot of us, maybe most of us would say, I've accepted that gift.
I have crossed over, I know that I've crossed over.
Maybe it's been a long time since the crossing happened and maybe,
You've gotten weary on the journey.
We're gonna see a lot of that as we move forward with Israel, of people that get weary on the journey.
But you know, something that happens again and again in the history of Israel is they keep getting reminded that God brought you through the Red Sea.
You may feel you've hit a dead end, you may feel that you're out of options, you may feel you can't go forward any farther, but then they say, but don't forget about the Red Sea.
God has brought you here,
The same God that brought you across is not going to leave you now.
He is not going to fail you.
I hope that Steve's story, maybe it was a good reminder of your own story.
Whatever that experience was for you of crossing over.
It was John Newton, the one time slave trader who penned those beautiful words to amazing grace.
A tribute.
really to his own crossing over.
Amazing grace.
How sweet the sound that saved a wretch like me.
I once was lost, but now I've crossed over.
Now I'm found.
I was blind, but now I see.
Let's pray.
Lord Jesus, thank you.
Thank you for the amazing undeserved gift of your life for ours, of forgiveness, of your willingness to open a way for us to cross over, something we could not do for ourselves, but a gift you've given us.
Father, for each one of us who has experienced that crossing, we thank you.
And I pray for any of my brothers and sisters this morning that have crossed over but are also at a point where they're tired in the journey.
Lord, I pray to remind them that you are still with them and perhaps you're letting them go through the fight now, but you have not forsaken them.
Give them strength, I pray.
For any of my friends here this morning that have not yet taken that step, but they're looking at and they're thinking about Lord, I pray that you would grant them the faith, the courage to take that step of faith and to
Step into the discovery of what it means to walk with you.
Thank you, Lord, that you haven't left us as slaves, that you have brought us into freedom.
We praise you for that.
In Jesus' name, amen.